# подсчёт ссылок

* https://nim-lang.org/araq/ownedrefs.html

So tracing is "out", let's have a look at reference counting (RC). RC is incomplete, it cannot deal with cyclic data structures. Every known solution to the dynamic cycle detection/reclamation strategy is some form of tracing:

"Trial deletion" is a trace of a local subgraph. Unfortunately the subgraph can be as large as the set of live objects.
A "backup" mark and sweep GC is a global tracing algorithm.
One way of looking at this problem is that RC cannot deal with cycles because it too eager, it increments the counters even for back references or any other reference that produces a cycle. And after we break up the cycles manually with weak pointer annotations or similar, we're still left with RC's inherent runtime costs which are very hard to optimize away completely.

Nim's default GC is a deferred reference counting GC. That means that stack slot updates do not cause RC operations. Only pointers on the heap are counted. Since Nim uses thread local heaps the increments and decrements are not atomic. As an experiment I replaced them with atomic operations. The goal was to estimate the costs of atomic reference counting. The result was that on my Haswell CPU bootstrapping time for the Nim compiler itself increased from 4.2s to 4.4s, a slowdown of 5%. And there is no contention on these operations as everything is still single threaded. This suggests to me that reference counting should not be the default implementation strategy for Nim's ref and we need to look at other solutions.